# Affect and Embodiment Notes Log

**Last updated: September 7, 2020**

## *The Body in Pain: Making and Unmaking the World*, Elaine Scarry. 1985.

*"Medical contexts, like all other contexts of fuman experience, provide instances of alarming phenomenon noted earlier: to have great pain is to have certainty; to hear that another person has pain is to have doubt. (The doubt of other persons, here as elsewhere, amplifies the suffering of those already in pain.)" (p. 7)*

-

*"The word 'deconstruct; rather than 'destroy' is used...because to say the interrogation 'visibly destroys' the prisoner's voice only implies that the *outcome* of the event is the shattering of the person's voice (and if this alone were the goal, there would be no need for a verbal interrogation since the inflicted pain alone accomplishes this outcome). The prolonged interrogation, however, also graphically objectifies the step-by-step backward movement along the path by which language comes into being and which is here being reversed or uncreated or deconstructed." (p. 20)*

-

*"Although the gerund 'imagining' assumes an activity, and although in some philosophic contxts it is descried as though it were made up of both an intentional act and an intentional object, in fact (as has long been intuitively recognized in the centuries-old game played by children and philosophers ali) it is impossible to imagine without imagining something. The attributes that the invisible and itself (apart from its objects) inexperiencable activity of imagining is understood to have, tend to be derived from the attributes of whatever 'imagined object' happened to have been taken as a representable instance of imagineding." (pp. 162-163)*

-

*"The weapon and the tool seem at moments indistinguishable, for they may each reside in a single physical object...and may be quickly transformed back and forth, now into the one, now into the other. At the same time, however, a gulf of meaning, intention, connotation, and tone seperates them. If one holds the two side by side in front of mind--a hand (as weapon) and a hand (as tool), a knife (weapon) and a knife (tool), a hammer and a hammer...**it is then clear that what differentiates them is not the object itself but the surface on which they fall**." (p. 173)*

-

*"The power of alteration resides equally in weapons and in tools. In each there is a tremenendous distance between what is occuring at the two ends, **not simply because one end is active and the other passive**, but because a fairly inconsequential alteration at one end is magnified into an occurance full of consequence at the other. A small shift in the body at one end of the gun (so small it is almost imperceptible, only the position of one finger moves) can wholly shatter a body at its other end." (pp. 174-175)*

-

*tags: pain, body, language, affect, materialism, tools, agency

## *Vibrant Matter: A political ecology of things*, Jane Bennett. 2010.

*"How would political responses to public problems change were we to take seriously the vitality of (nonhuman) bodies? By 'vitality' I mean the capacity of things--edibles, commodities, storms, metals--not only to impede or block the trajectories, propensities, or tendicies of their own...What difference would it make to public health if eating was understood as an encounter between various and variegated bodies, **some of them mine, most of them not, and none of which always gets the upper hand...to be figured not simply as a resource, commoditiy, or instrumentality, but also and more radically as an 'actant'?"** (p. viii)* 

*"For Spinoza, both simple bodies (which are perhaps better termed *protobodies*) and the complex or mosaicized modes they form are conative. In the case of the former, conatus is expressed as a stubborness or inertial tendency to persists in the case of a complex body or mode, conatus refers to the effort required to maintain the specific relation of **'movement and rest'** that obtains between its parts, a relation that defines the mode as what it is...What it means to be a "mode," then is to form alliances and enter assemblages: it is to mod(e)ify and be modified by others. The process of modification is not under the control of any one mode--no mode is an agent in the hierarchical sense." (p. 22)*

*"'The bacteria in the human microbiome collectively possess at least 100 times as many genes as the mere 20,000 or so in the human genome.' The *its* outnumber the *mes*. In a world of vibrant matter, it is thus not enough to say that we are 'embodied.' We are, rather, an *array of bodies*, many different kinds of them in a nested set of microbiomes." (pp. 112-113)*

- Vital materialism successfully moves away from posthumanism's autopoeitic-inspired systems theory and offers instead networks of sympoeisis (where systems indicate (often human) intentionality rather than distributed agency (see notes below). The autopoeitic tendencies of posthuman mutliplicities are centered around the (post)human subject and are in favour the agency of (post)human subjectivity (p. 120). These are the hurdles of theorizing human and nonhuman networks which vital materialists aim to surpass.

- Spinoza's conatus acts similarly to homeostatic modes for maintaining feedback (presence/absence, pattern/randomness, movement/rest) that is often found in cybernetic theories and of Hayles' "distributed consciousness." However, Bennett's use of Spinoza here departs from the cybernetic tradition of posthumanism as it assumes no heirarchy of status or intent, perhaps even no purpose in action, simply and assemblage of actants. Adopting such as view of distributed agency, as Bennett ultimately argues, reimagines relations between human and nonhuman not as relations of control and maintainance as in the tradition of cybernetics (and through poststructuralism such as Foucauldian thought), but instead necessitates a responsibility within and across assemblages (p. 37).

- Further, theories of embodiment are ontologically unsatisfactory for Bennett as they also fail to surpass the hurdle of human subjectivity; despite aiming to overcome a mind/body dualism that limits the locus of human subjectivity to the immaterial and transcendental mind, embodiment theories even in their figurations of multiplicities, such as "fragmented identities," still imagine a central locus to which those identities belong. 

*"...a strong distinction between persons and things must remain lest one have no *moral* grounds for privileging man over germ...First, by acknowledging that the framework of subject versus object had indeed at times worked to prevent or ameliorate human suffering and to promote human happieness or well-being. Second,by noting that its successes come at the price of an instrumentalization of nonhuman nature that can itself be unethical and can itself undermine long-term human interests. Third, by pointing out that the Kantian imperative to treat humanity always as an end-in-itself and never merely as a means does not have a stellar record of success in preventing human suffering or promoting human well-being." (p. 12)*

- Again, we see that the relationship between affect, ethics, and politics is inseperable, despite attempts in Gregg and Seigworth (introduction) to isolate these objects. The assemblages of vital materialism point to the necessity of accounting for the aesthetic in the ethical and the political in the affectual and so on. That being said, Bennett's chapter on food, while discussing ethics of obesity and diet, starkly omits politics of food security and food soveriegnty and vital materialisms of consumerism, capitalism, and environmental ecologies which create excess for some and absence for others (p. 51).

*"...it may be relevant to note the extent to which **intentional reflexivity** is also a product of the interplay of human and nonhuman forces. Bernard Stiegler does just this in his study of how tool-use engendered a being with an inside, with, that is, a psychological landscape of interiority. Stiegler contends that conscious reflection in (proto)humans first emerged with the use of stone tools because the materiality of the tool acted as an external marker of a past need, as an 'archive' of its function. The stone tool (its texture, color, weight), in calling attention to its projected and recollected use, produced the first hollow of reflection. Humanity and nonhumanity have always performed an intricate dance with each other. There was never a time when human agency was anything other than an interfolding network of humanity and nonhumanity; today this mingling has become harder to ignore." (p. 31)*

- Steigler's notions of co-construction between human and tool (a chicken-and-egg scenario of human consciousness and thing-as-tool) must concede the agency of the nonhuman in this co-productive relationship. However, if a thing of vital materiality has agency (as vital materialists argue they do), it cannot be a "mediating" object and "tools" as used in Stiegler's example cannot exist--at least, not as we imagine them to. That is, to be understood as a "tool," the thing must take on a mediating relation between at least two other things or events (an octopus uses a shell to hide, a human uses a hammer to drive a nail). This mediating role that we so often imagine tools to take on reduces the thing's agency, assuming intentionality in the *user* but not in the *object of use.* This conception of tool is antithetical to vital materialism: a hammer or a shell cannot be tools. Instead, these shimmering and lively things are actants in assemblages without any passive vassalage to "a user."

- Note, Bennett does not explicitly shun the "tool" from vital materialism as I have; she includes "actant" and "tool" equally in a long list of descriptors that she uses to describe food (p. 39).

*tags: vital materialities, new materialism, affect, things, aesthetics

## *The Affect Theory Reader*, eds., Melissa Gregg and Gregory J. Seigworth. 2010.

**"An Inventory of Shimmers", Gregory J. Seigworth and Melissa Gregg.**

*"In practice, then, affect and cognition are never fully seperable--if for no other reason than that thought is itself a body, embodied...With affect, a body is as much outside itself as in itself--webbed in its relations--until ultimately such firm distinctions cease to matter...But as Spinoza recognized, this issue is never the generic figuring of "the body" (any body) but, much more singularly, endeavoring to configure *a* body and the affects/affectedness, its ongoing affectual composition of *a* world, the *this-ness* of a world and a body." (pp. 2-3)*

*"What should follow as critical practice, Barthes argued, is a neutrally inflected, immanent *pathos* or 'patho-logy" that would be an 'inventory of shimmers, of nuances, of states, of changes (pathè)' as they gather into 'affectivity, sensibility, sentiment,' and come to serve as 'the passion for difference' (77). Here affect theory is, at one level, an 'inventory of shimmers' while. upon another register, it is a matter of affectual composition (in a couple of senses of the word 'composition'--as an ontology always coming to formation but also,, more prosaically, as creative/writerly task). This is a passion for differences as continuous, shimmering gradations of intensities. **Making an inventory (of singularities).** And in the interval, is the stretching: unfolding a patho-logy (of 'not-yets')." (p. 11, my emphasis)*

- Affect theory, often approaches the challenges of a Cartesian dualism of mind and body awkwardly. While affect theorists often take materialist approaches to embodiment as an attempt to avoid speration of the mind from the body, affective and descriptive language betrays theorists (as it does Gregg and Seigworth in their intro) by attempting to locate affect at all, whether that be in cognition, *the* body, *a* body, bodies, and so on.

- This contradiction between location and embodiment is exacerbated further by some theorists' tendencies to see affect as a set of, or inventory of, *singularities* which collect and consolidate into the Barthean "patho-logy" of Spinozan "not-yets." This tendency to see moments and loci of affect as singular is particularly difficult to reconcile when one considers affect and representation of identity. The effect being that that affect theory could find subject identity to be reducible to singular moments ("shimmers") of affect, a contradictory imagination of the multiplicitous subject of Deluezean post-structuralism to which much of affect theory is responding.

- How do such singularities of affect compare to posthuman notions of the subject through "distributed consciousness" or "fragmented identities"? I argue that affect theory tends to view the "inventory of singularities" as an inventory of discrete and whole parts while the former notions of consciousness and identity are always partial and always pointing (differing from and defering) to the subjet of multiplicitous identity.

*"Each essay presents its own account of encounters with forces and passages of intensity that bear out, while occasionally leaving bare, the singularly and intimately impersonal--even sub-personal and pre-personal--folds of belonging (or non-belonging) to a world. **That is the unceasing challenge presented by Spinoza's "not yet," conveying a sense of urgency that transforms the matter and mattering of affect into an ethical, aesthetic, and political task all at once.**" (p. 3, my emphasis)*

- Can a matter of affect be reducible to the purely ethical, aesthetic, or political? I tend to think any of these essentializations of the "matter of affect" and why affect matters would require, by design, an omission of such factors which shape affectual phenomenology. That is, aesthetics themselves are an ethic,and there are certainly always politics to any aesthetic rubric.


**"Happy Objects", Sara Ahmed.**

*"I do not assume there is something called affect that stands apart or has autonomy, as if it corresponds to an object in the world, or even that there is something called affect that can be shared as an object of study...Bodily transformations may also transform what is experiences as delightful. If our bodies change over time, then the world around us will create different impressions. To be affected by something is to evaluate that thing. Evaluations are expressed in how bodies turn toward things. To give value to things in to shape what is near us." (pp. 30-31)*

- Ahmed's notion of affect does not assume an immanence of affect in objects both in the world, or as an isolated object of study. In this  statement, Ahmend inspires an affective turn to Heidegger's "The Thing" where questions the "thingness" of a "thing" are foregrounded by questions of the feeling or affective possibility of the thing. Ahmed's rejection of the capacity for an object to hold affect beyond human projection and relation to the thing makes non-human objects neutral and passive tools which neglects how the bilateral relation where objects do indeed *shape us* (rather than us simply shaping objects through what Ahmed calls an "orientation to" passing and passed around objects) through infrastucture and politics, and the corresponding affectual responses we may have. This is why affect cannot be seperated from politics, ethics, or aesthetics. 

**"Writing Shame", Elspeth Probyn.**

*"Deleuze is particularly interested in what he calls 'the subjective disposition' of [T. E.] Lawrence's writing. We could more simply say that Lawrence's writing was heavily autobiographical and psychological, but Deleuze shifts the meaning of those terms. He starts with an appreciation of Lawrence's skill as a potraitist...The deftness with which Lawrence paints characters is remarkable. As Deleuze puts it, 'The finest writers have singular conditions of perception that allow them to draw on or shape aesthetic percepts like veritable visions' (116). Deleuze elaborates this claim through the notion of a subjective character or disposition. This is something quite beyond a personal identity. If we remember that for Deleuze there is no unified person as such, then the idea of an autobiographical or personal style of writing becomes impossible." (p. 78)*

*"For Levi, shame in its shades of gray is plural. The experiences of shame are also what remind him of his humanity." (p. 88)*

- Probyn also takes up affect theory's complicated relationship with singularity and multiplicity. Here, Probyn argues, through Delueze multiplicity and with examples of Primo Levi's reflective writings on the Holocaust, that affect as phenomenom is not a collection of singular intensities captured in composition, as editors Gregg and Seigworth take it to be. Rather, closely following the Deluezean tradition, Probyn insists that any collection of affects (in this case, shame), as embodied and autobiographical as one might capture and compose them to be, cannot account for the identity they aim to represent in any unified manner. For Levi, shame, as an irreducible part of his personal experience and negotiation with his own humanity, cannot be captured in the singular, but has plurality. Much like the multiplicity of the subject, affect in relation to that subject is multiple too.

**"The Affective Turn: Political Economy, Biomedia, and Bodies", Patricia T. Clough**

*"So, for Massumi the turn to affect is about opening the body to its indeterminacy, the indeterminacy of autonomic responses. It is therefore necessary for Massumi to define affect in terms of its autonomy from conscious perception and language, as well as emotion. He proposes that if conscious perception is to be understood as the narration of affect--as it is in the case of emotion, for example-there nonetheless always is 'a never-to-be-conscious-autonomic remainder'; 'a virtual remainder,' an excess of affect (2002, 25). Further, it is this excess out of which the narration of emotion is 'subtracted,' smoothing it over retrospectively 'to fit conscious requirements of continuity and linear causality' (29). Consciousness is 'subtractive' because it reduces complexity. It is 'limitative; a derived function in a virtual field where actualization becomes, at that same moment of actualization, the limit of that field, which otherwise has no pre-given empirical limit. Affect and consciousness are in a virtual-actual circuit, which defines affect as potential and emergent." (p. 209)*

- See Jane Bennett's *Vibrant Matter* (p. 14) for Adorno's "negative dialectics" and "nonidentity" which works similarly to Massumi's "excess of affect"

- Massumi's turn to affect, understood as intensity (*Parables of the Virtual 27), incorporates, or rather, incorporealizes affect in its "virtual remainder" that cannot be captured and representated by conscious perception or language alone. Here, we have not necessarily a mind-body split, but what Stone refers to as the "physical/virtual distinction" where mind is *not* considered part of the virtual space of discourse (as more than simply language). Stone's concept of "warranting;" the production and maintaining of the relationship between the physical and virtual spaces. Massumi's "virtual-actual circuit" of affect, which can be understood as a warranting system between discourse and the physical (what Massumi calls the "actual"). What Massumi brings to Stone's "warranting" is an understanding of that affective "excess" which cannot be accurately produced or processed by representations of the self through the "subtractive consciousness", and which drives the constant efforts for homeostasis within the act of warranting, thereby driving continual and new productions of the self.

*tags: affect, mind body split, politics, aesthetics, materialism, bodies, biopolitics

## *Gender Trouble*, Judith Butler. 1990.

*"The question of 'the subject' is crucial for politics, and for feminist politics in particular, because juridicial subjects are invariably produced through certain exclusionary practices that do not "show" once the juridicial structure of politics has been established. In other words, the political construction of the subject proceeds with certain legitimating and exclusionary aims, and these political operations are effectively concealed and naturalized by a political analysis that takes juridicial structurs as their foundation. Juridicial power inevitably 'produces' what it claims merely to represent; hence, politics must be concerned with this dual function of power: the juridicial and the productive. In effect, the law produces and then conceals the notion of "a subject before the law" in order to invoke that discursive formation as a naturalized foundational premise that subsequently legitimates that law's own regulatory hegemony." (p. 3)*

- *Gender Trouble* largely regards the question of the gendered subject and its production, surveying and problematizing theories on sex and gender by thinkers, Beauvoir, Irigaray, Foucault, Kristeva and Wittig. Largely, Butler seems to agree with the fundamentals of a Foucauldian reading of sex as an *effect* of power structures, and further posits that "the being of gender" (45) are the phenomenological mimetic effects of a hegemonic ontology which constructs gendered and sexed subjects through its politics (often, discursively). This mimesis, Butler argues, also produces homosexuality and gender non-conformity as "parodic repition" of the symbolic "orginal" (i.e., the hegemonically produced heterogeniety) (43). 

- Of course, these productions are part of what Butler famously concludes to be performance; that is, (re)productions of gender stabilize or subvert this cultural hegemony. Butler reminds us that not all parodic repetitions are subversive (189).

- In this passage, Butler adopts Foucauldian language to describe the "juridicial structure" of power and politics. This structure, and its juridicial subjects are both inside of the system (producing social realities) and outside of the system (which conceals the subject-relation to the system in order to "invoke that discursive formation as a naturalized foundational premise that subsequently legitimates that law's own regulatory hegemony" (3). The juridicial system that Butler describes here demonstrates precisely the reflexivity of systems presented by Wolfe in *What is Posthumanism* to the effect of a relationship between subject and identity in which one variable always presupposes and reproduces the other (referred to as the "chicken-egg" problem by Johnson in "Sorting Out the Question of Feminist Technology")

- In this sense, efforts by Irigaray, Wittig, and Foucault to locate the causality of a subject in language (gendered language) or discourse which presupposes the subject as sex are insufficient because language/discursive acts because the production of the gendered self is not the effect of a unilateral relation to a univocal language.

*"Within feminist political practice, a radical rethinking of the ontological constructions of identity appears to be necessary in order to formulate a representational politics that might revive feminism on other grounds. On the other hand, it may be time to entertain a radical critique that seeks to free feminist theory from the necessity of having to construct a single or abiding ground which is invariably contestes b those identity positions or anti-identity positions that it invariable excludes." (p. 7)

*"To what extent do *regulatory practices* of gender formation and division constitute identity, the internal coherence of the subject, indeed, the self-identical status of the person?..Inasmuch as 'identity' is assured through the stabilizing concepts of sex, gender, and sexuality, the very notion of 'the person' is called into question by the cultural emergence of those 'incoherent' or 'discontinuous' gendered beings who appear to be persons but who fail to conform to the gendered norms of cultural intelligibility by which persons are defined." (p. 23)

- The call for a radical rethinking of "the ontological constructions of identity" while simultaneously entertaining a critique which liberates feminist theory from essentialism can be answered through interpretations of posthumanism as "fragmented identities" (see Halberstam and Livingston's *Posthuman Bodies*, 1995). In this genealogical reading, *Gender Trouble* can be seen as a prehistory to the intersections of queer theory and posthuman thought with their shared core tenets on embracing multiplicity of identity over essentialism, pleasure over domination, ironic/parodic subversion over hegemony, and a necessary rethinking of Cartesian mind/body dualism in favour of embodied ontoepistemology.

- Particularly, Butler's attempts to disrupt the construction of the subject (one understood as an artifact of humanism) (26) resonates with the work on posthumanist thinking that was paradigmatically concurrent with Butler's writing.

*"For Wittig, language is an instrument or tool that is in no way misogynist in its structures, only in its applications. For Irigaray, the possibility of another language or signifying economy is the only way to escape the 'mark' of gender which, for the feminine, is nothing but the phallogocentric erasure of the female sex...Wittig is clearly attuned to the power of language to subordinate and exclude women. As a 'materialist,' however, she considers language to be "another order of materiality," an institution that can be radically transformed." (p. 36)*

*"Although he argues in *The History of Sexuality* that sexuality is coextensive with power, he fails to recognize the concrete relations of power that both construct and condemn Herculine's pleasures as the 'happy limbo of non-identity' (xiii), a world that exceeds the categories of sex and identity...The use of this juridicial model presumes that the relation between power and sexuality is not only ontologically distinct, but that power always and only works to subdue or liberate a sex which is fundamentally intact, self-suffiecient, and other than power itself. When 'sex' is essentialized in this way, it becomes ontologically immunized from power relations and from its historicity. As a result, the analysis of sexuality is collapsed into the analysis of 'sex,' and any inquiry into the historical production of the category of 'sex' itself is precluded by this inverted and falsifying causality." (pp. 128-129)*

- Wittig's materialist view that language is "another order of materiality" provides a starkly different view of discourse and materiality than the Foucauldian views of the body as discursive. That is, a materialist reading of Foucault would understand that while the body produces and is produced by discourse, such discursive productions are not simply limited to language and cultural abstractions; they have embodied, somatic, psychic effects. In *How We Became Posthuman*, Hayles' critiques Foucault for not a focusing on embodiment and the "instantiated enactments that create feedback loops between materiality and discourse" (Hayles 195). While Wittig and Hayles both take on materialist views of discourse, Hayles' feedback loops place the material/discourse relation in a dialectical opposition where each of materiality and discourse are unique forces stuck in a co-production with each other. On the other hand, Wittig makes no disctinction between the two, seeing language as a type of materiality. 

- Hayles understanding of materiality as distinguishable from discourse suggests that for her, subversion might take place at the intervention of discourse (the floating signifier) and that the material itself is adiscursive, asymbolic, and apolitical (see Winner "Do Artifacts Have Politics"), and thus that, should the feedback loop break, material artifacts might be able to exceed its discursive limitations (if only until it is yoked to another discoursive feedback loop). 

- Foucault makes just this argument about the 19C "hermaphrodite," Herculine. Butler argues against Foucault that one cannot "exceed" the discursive limitations of sex and identity. Of course, in the case of gender it becomes clear that one cannot differentiate between the gendered body and the discursive power that produces it. Thus, Hayles' notion of the feedback loop between materiality and discourse is insufficient to theorize identity because the subject can never be severed or isolated from its signification as "subject."
