# Posthumanism Notes Log

**Last updated: July 7, 2020**

## *What is Posthumanism?*, Cary Wolfe. 2010.

*"Here, however, it is useful to recall Foucault's suggestion from his essay of 1984 by the same title ["What is Enlightenment?"]: that if we commit to 'a permanent critique of ourselves,' then we must 'avoid the always too facile confusions between humanism and Enlightenment,' because 'the humanistic thematic is in itself too supple, too diverse, too inconsistent to serve as an axis for reflection.' Indeed, as Foucault notes, 'it is a fact that, at least since the seventeenth century what is called humanism has always been obliged to lean on certain conceptions of man borrowed from religion, science, or politics." (p. xiv)*

*"But the first lessons of both Derrida and Luhmann (and in this they go beyond Foucault's genealogical method and beyond the dialectical and historical accounts of the sort we find in Hayles) is that Enlightenment rationality is not, as it were, rational enough, because it stops short of applying its own protocols ands commitments to *itself*. This is, of course, the entire point of Derrida's deconstruction..." (p. xx)*

*"Systems theory...does not occlude, deny, or otherwise devalue difference but rather begins with difference--namely, the cornerstone postulate of the difference between system and environment, and the corollary assumption that the environment of any system is always already of overwhelmingly greater complexity than the system itself...Under pressure to adapt to a complex and changing environment, systems increase their selectivity--they make their filters more finely woven, if you like--by building up their own internal complexity by means of self-referential closure and the reentry of the system/environment distinction within the system itself within a process of internal differentiation...This self-referential closure, however, does not indicate solipsism, idealism, or isolation but is instead crucial to understanding a fundamental principle...of what I call 'openness from closure.'" (pp. 14-15)*

- Wolfe's introduction to *What is Posthumanism?* provides a genealogy of "posthumanist" thought and its various recursions of and divergences from humanist tendencies. Citing Bromstrom, Wolfe traces contemporary instantiations of transhumanism as a direct descendant of "Renaissance humanism and the Enlightenment" with its emphasis on "human perfectability and rationality" (p. xiii) as achieved through practices of "empirical science and critical reason" (p. xiv). However, Wolfe is quick to dismiss transhumanist ideals as the "posthumanism" of his concern because of transhumanist tendencies to reproduce Enlightenment rationality, combined with futurists' dreams of extropian technologies without exercising its own protocols of "critical reason" against its own system of philisophical production.

- This critique of transhumanism, which Wolfe sees as one of the "humanist ways of criticizing the extension of humanism that we find in transhumanism (or 'bad' posthumanism)" as Wolfe calls it (p. xvii), sets the groundwork for his argument that systems theory (per Niklas Luhmann) can be used complementary to Derridean deconstruction to decenter the human from the production of meaning within a given system, and to decenter the production of meaning within a system from its environment.

- Wolfe's work thereby pushes the boundaries of posthumanist thought past the physical/virtual boundary work of Stone, Hayles, Foster, and the like who have predominantly considered the posthuman relation to cybernetic/virtual systems. Rather, Wolfe tends to dismiss the question of the "posthuman subject" altogether in favour of presenting the onto-epistemological characteristics of "posthuman**ism**"

*"...posthumanism means not the triumphal surpassing of or unmasking of something, but an increase in the vigilance, responsibility, and humility that accompany living in a world so newly, and differently, inhabited." (p. 47)*

- Wolfe's conclusion to the second chapter of *What is Posthumanism?* wraps up an exploration which decenters language and the production of meaning from consciousness, or cognitive processes. By doing so, Wolfe make the ethical argument that long-standing debates around animal cognition and animal rights should not be measured by an animals ability to signify (or rather, a human's ability to recieve and decode signification by an animal, should it occur). Cartesian arguments of the presence of *cogito* and Bentham's "can they suffer?" argument are therefore arbitrary to any ethical consideration of animal rights. Instead, a posthumanist approach to these questions does not attempt to overcome the gap in linguistic signification between human and nonhuman animals, rather it reorients (in a rather Harawayan way) the "system" in new ways to its "environment," allowing greater influence in its openness to environment.

- In this way, Wolfe's work is certainly within the realm of animal studies. However, his approach to human relationality to non-human animals primarily pressures new ontologies of the "posthumanism" where Shukin's approach to animal studies is primarily concerned with the convergence of material and cultural production of animal bodies under capitalist rationality.

- This response-ability (in the Harawayan sense) to the system/environment relation rings similar to Stone's warrenting (also heavily used by Foster) as "A different way of conceptualizing the relationship to the human body" (Stone, 40). However, Wofe pushes the boundaries of relation further than Stone's physical/virtual duality and opens the terrain of posthumanist critique to include all cultural, social, and psychic production.

*tags: posthumanism, animal studies, cognitive sciences, systems theory, language, meaning, semiotics
 

## *The Souls of Cyberfolk: Posthumanism as Vernacular Theory*, Thomas Foster. 2005.

*"Stone’s virtual systems theory sets out to rearticulate debates about the public sphere, and specifically the modern, liberal narrative of the formation of the rational citizen through the transcendence of bodily particularity. For Stone, then, virtual reality systems literalize what Lauren Berlant calls the “real attraction of abstract citizenship”: “the way the citizen conventionally acquires a new body by participation in the political public sphere...seems to acknowledge the connection I am making here to Berlant’s critique of the abstract form of the citizen..." **Stone defines “warranting” as “the production and maintenance of [a] link between a discursive space and a physical space” (40). The necessity for this link is made more obvious by virtual reality computer interfaces precisely to the extent that they exaggerate the separation between these two spaces to previously unheard-of lengths.**" (p. 138)*

- Foster shares Stone's preference for physical/virtual systems over mind/body dualism as a way to represent the multiple posthuman subject-citizen within public systems. This conception of the virtual citizen in cyperspace is grounded in Berlant's critique of the traditional humanist "rational citizen" as already fluid and abstract in their "participation in the political public sphere." However, Foster complicates the notion of citizenship and creation of the subject as he pressures what it means for the posthuman to embody a racially marked physicality.

- Foster adopts Stone's use of "warranting" as a way to point to the constant production and reproduction of the posthuman subject as both discursive and physical (what I've been loosely referring to as the "material-semiotic" condition of posthuman cultural production). The use of warranting to maintain the link virtual and physical spaces reveals what Stone calls "A different way of conceptualizing the relationship to the human body" (Stone, 40) beyond mind/body dualism. 

*"But the later omission of race from Stone’s argument might also suggest that race cannot simply be analogized to gender and that gender or transgender practices in cyberspace might difer signifcantly from their racialized counterparts" (p. 139)*

*"At the same time, such assumptions cannot be grounded in physical appearance, in the same way that both passing and blackface minstrelsy detach racial characteristics from physical anatomy, by attaching characteristics associated with one race to bodies that are marked as belonging to the other race (if only by as abstract and indeterminate a “marker” as “blood”). In fact, racial performances in cyberspace seem to blur the distinction between passing and blackface, at least in terms of the different agents traditionally associated with them, to the extent that white people as well as blacks must pass as white to be recognized as such in the absence of their bodies, and black people as well as whites must put on a kind of blackface to be recognized as black." (p. 167)*

- Foster is critical of Stone's broad-stroke painting of issues of gender and racial identities within *War of Desire and Technology* only to omit racial differences across bodies and virtual subjects by her conclusion. Indeed, race and gender cannot be made analogous indicators of a "marked" identity. Not only does Foster argue that Black racial identity in virtual space requires minstrel-esque performativity of virtual "blackface." This is closely linked to contemporary concerns about "digital blackface" performed by white subjects who use reaction gifs and and other appropriated black bodies and artifacts of black culture to represent/surrogate their physical and emotional responses within the abstraction of virtual space.

*"[Micheal Collins'] capture then leads to a reenactment of diaspora on the level of body parts, with the detachment of the brain from the rest of the corpus. In this “diaspora,” the physical body signifes the equivalent of an African origin, and the transformation into a cyborg constitutes Collin’s own reenactment of the Middle Passage, as Apter suggested. Deathlok’s cyborg narrative, then, also functions as a captivity narrative. It is important to note that this second, historical reading of how Deathlok’s physical body signifes after his passage into a cyborg body is not just metaphorical. There is a literal sense in which African-American bodies have historically undergone legal and cultural processes that detached the signs of humanity from the bodily markers of “blackness,” as a result of the diaspora, as Spillers points out. At the same time, there is also a literal sense in which African-American bodies have historically been primitivized as signifying an absent and possibly inaccessible origin, one associated in U.S. culture with the physical facticity of those bodies, their status as “nature."" (p. 155)*

- In his analysis of the graphic novel series, *Deathlok,* Foster further articulates the nuances of the racially marked cyborg/virtual body - predominantly that cyborg politics are not, and cannot be free of racist cultural production. *Deathlok* aims to challenge stereotypical portrayals of the cyborg as weaponized humanity lacking full autonomy in place of programmable actions. While the portrayal of the pacifist Deathlok works to overturn stereotypes about what it means to be a cyborg and/or a black man might be considered Harawayan cyborg ontology at work, it is necessary to remember that Haraway's cyborg is not explicitly pacifist and implicitly corruptible; "the main trouble with cyborgs […] is that they are the illegitimate offspring of militarism and patriarchal capitalism” which Hil Malatino argues is rooted in an inherently colonial violence (Haraway, qtd in Malatino's "Biohacking Gender", 185).

- Thus, to take up the figure of the pacifist cyborg, Micheal Collins/Deathlok is, as Foster argues, constantly negotiating his multiple identities as colonial/colonized subject, both cyborg and human, both black and chromatic (distinctly non-white, but also an other Other beyond racial marking as black). These negotiations, along with the performative "blackface" of virtual spaces, leaves Collins' subject as captive, diasporic and multiply abstracted leaving constantly warranting himself as subject.

*tags: posthuman, virtuality, cyberspace/cyberpunk, critical race theory, cyborg politics, subject

## *The War of Desire and Technology at the Close of the Mechanical Age*, Allucquère Rosanne Stone. 1995.

*"Exactly where, I say to myself, *is* Hawking? Am I any closer to him now that I was outside? Who is doing the talking up there on the stage? In an important sense, Hawking doesn't stop being Hawking at the edge of his visible body. There is the obvious physical Hawking, vividly outlined by the way our social conditioning teaches us to see a person as a person. But a serious part of Hawking extends into the box in his lap. In mirror image, a serious part of that silicon and plastic assemblage in his lap extends into the box in his lap extends into him as well...Where *does* he stop? Where are his edges? The issues his person and his protheses raise are boundary debates, borderland/*frontera* questions." (p. 5)*    

*"Inside the little [computer] box is information...Computers are arenas for social experience and dramatic interaction, a type of media more like public theater, and their output is used for qualitative interaction, dialogue, and conversation. Inside the little [computer] box are *other people*." (p. 16)* 

- Stone posits that there exists a "multiple view" in communications technology wherein the computer is either thought to contain nothing, merely information (data), or to contain everything, people and their social experiences/interactions. This dichotomy of approaches to communications technology helps to illustrate what Stone means by "the war of desire and technology" where desire for meaningful social connections via cyber-mediated experiences is often at odds with the  technological constraints of those who fund, design, maintain, and manage these technologies and their uses. 

- The information/person dichotomy in virtual systems might be compressed into a single boundary object. Not an either/or binary, but a both/and relationship. People engaged in social virtual networks are reduced through what Stone calls "narrow-bandwidth" (p. 35): a collapsing of complex systems (such as a person, embodied) into media channels at much lower resolution (i.e., the telephone becomes narrow-bandwidth as it reduces embodied experience to voice and then transfers that voice to data over telephone lines). The both/and phenomenon of person-as-information is akin to what Hayles calls "reflexivity" as each "box" (computer) and each person are their own "systems," both connected at large and interacting within the other's system.

- This is exemplified by Stone's use of Hawking as a thought experiment for virtuality and boundary work. For Stone, Hawking-as-subject cannot be separated from his prostheses, nor can they be separated from him when all are working together. Yet, there is a "social conditioning" in which Stone can immediately recognize flesh as discrete from technological apparatus.

- I’m intellectually cautious of the tendency for cultural theorists to use pathologies and other lived disorders/conditions as analogies for “multiplicity” and “virtuality” with D&G’s use of “schizophrenia” being a seminal case, but the language is taken up by many others including Stone and Hayles (see Hayles' reading of Dick's femme characterization as a collapse of the "schizoid" and the "autistic", HWBPH, p. 161). Stone uses Hawking’s lived experience with ALS as opportunity for her to theorize virtuality and subjectivity. I think that the use of pathologies as analogies within any phenomenological critique does not work to undo the pathologizing of those who experience the daily struggles of schizophrenia, DID (formerly MPD), ALS, etc., as the Stone claims to achieve, but sensationalizes the phenomenology at work while erasing actual lived experience. I find this counterproductive to the arguments that Stone is trying to make. This follows a very ableist tradition of using such bodies as fodder for thought experiments in academia.

*"**My game** is for the reader--that's you--to perform your own synthesis, if synthesis is your game." (p. 30, emphasis added)*

*"Thus, the technology that produces and maintains the fiduciary subject not only produces a discursive landscape, but simultaneously calls into being inhabitants of that landscape who are proper to its geography and character...The socially apprehensible citizen, then, consists of a collection of both physical and discursive elements. Although the physical elements possess a special and bounded order of reality on account of their particular relationship to the social disciplines of pain and pleasure, the remainder of the citizen--by far the greater part, the part which is also concerned witht the production of meaning of the physical part--is discursive." (pp. 40-41)

*"...it may be clearer that the style of this book--and, for those who have met either of my two major personae at conferences, the style of personal presentation that it underscores--is a deliberate and considered intervention. In its seemingly haphazard and rambling style is embedded a careful and occasionally grim strategy. The purpose of this move is to open new possibilities for exchanging information at the professional level. As with any move toward change, it is greeted with deep suspicion in some circles and with guarded hope in others. **Its unabashed gesture of performance**, both in person and on the page, is seen as inappropriate in some quarters and as useful in its way in others. I don't expect the gesture of performance to be embraced with unqualified abandon or with aanything approaching uniformity."* (p. 177, emphasis added)

- Stone emphasizes her methodology in WoD&T as being both a "game" and a "performance." True to her word, it’s hard to tell where Stone’s storytelling ends and the critique begins. Stone’s “counteranthropological” and “countersociological” methods (much like Haraway's "counterscience") read as generously embellished and not fully trustworthy ethnographies without losing their critical focus. This is a key element of the cyborg theory that inspired Stone's work. Stone challenges the necessity of objectivity and historical, social, and techological accuracy of the account in favour for an account that is simply immersive and plausible in order to perform her critical analysis.

- Here Stone's critique of the cybernetic (post)human (though she rarely, if ever, uses the term "posthuman") differs from Hayles' analysis of the same subject in its steadfast focus on performative social interaction. Where Hayles favours the formation of the posthuman subject through systems of "distributed consciousness," Stone looks at how "floating identities" (p. 3), a term closer to the "fragmented identities" used across the Halberstam and Livingston collection, are created and maintained not only through the boundary work where virtual and embodied "systems" collapse, but also in the social constructions of multiple identities as enabled by such collapse. For Stone, one can't theorize virtuality without addressing the social desire it mediates and remediates itself through various resolutions/articulations ("materialized discursivity," a Harawayan approach to the material-semiotic) in interactive technological systems.

- Stone calls this "collection of virtual elements that, taken together, form a *materialized discursivity*" the "fiducuary subject" (p. 40). While she acknowledges a Foucauldian discursive body as the "greater part" of the fiduciary subject, Stone refuses to discount the subject as embodied, both physical and discursive. See Hayles p. 195.

*tags: virtual communities, social, identity, multiplicities, cyber systems, cyborg theory

## *How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics*, N. Katherine Hayles. 1999.

*"Embodiment has been systematically downplayed or erased in the cybernetic construction of the posthuman in ways that have not occured in other critiques of the liberal humanist subject, especially in feminist and postcolonialist critiques. Indeed, one could argue that the erasure of embodiment is a feature common to *both* the liberal humanist subject and the cybernetic posthuman" (p. 4)*

- Just as the age of cybernetics increasingly produced understandings of the (post)human as a system of information, homeostasis/reflexive production, ultimately erasing embodiment from the body-as-machine, Hayles argues that liberal humanism similarly fails to represent embodied experience, particularly through the erasure of embodied experiences of anyone who was not a white-settler, adult, male. Hayles assumptions about historical efforts to dematerialize from embodied experience might be complicated by a deeper genealogical view. Particularly, how might self-starving "Holy Anorexic" nuns of the 15th C., who refused food and their own flesh as abject in an attempt to become closer to God, complicate claims of erasure of embodiment as particularly importatn to liberal humanism and cybernetic posthumanism?

*"Different technologies of text production suggest different models of signification; changes in signification are linked with shifts in consumption; shifting patterns of consumption initiate new experiences of embodiment; and embodied experience interacts with codes of representation to generate new kinds of textual worlds. In fact, each category--production, signification, consumption, bodily experience, and representation--is in constant feedback and feedforward loops with the others...The contemporary pressure toward dematerialization, understood as an epistemic shift toward pattern/randomness and away from presence/absence, affects human and textual bodies on two levels at once, as a change in the body (the material substrate) and a change in the message (the codes of representation)." (pp. 28-29)*

- Hayles take up the issue of the material-semiotic boundaries of the posthuman subject (acknowledged particularly in Shukin's and Tallbear's works) in her tracing of "how information lost its body" through three distinct cybernetic waves. While an influx in virtuality and virtual experience has historically been signified as a dematerialization of information and information transfer, Hayles reminds us that these experiences are always in a constant circuitry of cultural and material production, consumption, signification, and embodied experience under a regime of shifting patterns out of randomness (a dialectic). Hayles sees this paradigm mirrored in Foucault's postmodern rendering of the body as discursive (p. 192).

*"The struggle to achieve autopoietic status can be understood as a boundary dispute in which one tries to claim the privileged "outside" position of an entity that defines its own goals while forcing one's opponent to take the "inside" position of an allopoietic component incorporated into a larger system...[Philip K.] Dick understood that how boundaries are constituted would be a central issue in deciding what counts as living in the late twentieth century." (p. 161)*

*"[Re: Foucault] Focusing on embodiment would help to clarify the mechanisms of change, for it links a changing technological landscape with the instantiated enactments that create feedback loops between materiality and discourse." (p. 195)*

- The issue of the creation/evolution of posthuman subject through literature is a main conern of Hayles' analysis. Here, the analysis of Dick's "boundary" work within reflexive tensions of consciousness and subjectivity might be seen as a sort of Butlerian/Fanon response to the Hegelian dialect (*Giving an Account,* *Black Skin, White Masks*). However, in Dick's work, the emphasis on autopoietic subject-as-system pressures the conception of the cultural production of subjects as a singular cohesive system with feedback loops responding to the pattern/randomness dialectic, rather than a dialectic (feedback loop) of dominant *embodied experiences* as *signified/interpellated* (particularly race and gender) which drive Fanon and Butler's works. This is one of the shortcomings of Hayles' distinct focus on the evolution of the posthuman subject out of the cybernetic age.

*"The subjects of these texts achieve consciousness through recursive feedback loops cycling between different levels of coding. The association of the posthuman subject with multiple coding levels suggests the need for different models of signification, ones that will recognize this distinctive feature of neurolinguistic and computer language structure. The idea of flickering signifiers, introduced in chapter 2, shows what one such model might be. Like subjectivity itself, human language is being redescribed in terms that underscore its similarities to and differences from computer coding." (p. 279)*

- "Distributed consciousness," that is, understanding the posthuman subject as existing and experiencing across various and multiple levels of signification (at all levels also embodied!), remains a primary trait of Hayles' posthuman. This is comparable to the "fragmented identities" that appear across Halberstam and Livingston. One similarity being the emphasis shared on the multiple (see Deleuze and Guattari). However, though Hayles does contend with performativity briefly (p. 274), the notion of posthuman *identity* as primarily the effect of cultural production (as presented in H&L) is nuanced by Hayles insistance that all of "cultural production," "signification," "consumption," "embodied experience," and "representation" are separate yet related features in the networked production of the posthuman subject.

*tags: posthuman, embodiment, cybernetics, multiplicities, postmodern, concsiousness, signification, semiotics, reflexivity*

## *Posthuman Bodies*, Jack Halberstam and Ira Livingston (Eds.). 1995.

**"Introduction: Posthuman Bodies," Jack Halberstam and Ira Livingston**

*"The posthuman does not necessitate the obsolecence of the human; it does not represent the an evolution or devolution of the human. Rather it participated in re-distributtion of difference and identity. The human functions to domesticate and hierarchize difference within the human (where according to race, class, gender) and to absoutize difference between the human and the nonhuman. The posthuman does not reduce difference-from-others to difference-from-self, but rather emerges in the pattern of resonance and interference between the two. The additive other (who is subordinate in several systems at once) is not necessarily the geometrically other of the posthuman, who may well be 'between between' in a single system." (p. 10)* 

- Through a collection of essays on posthuman cultural analysis, Halberstam and Livingston have compiled a landmark of late-twentieth century thought primarily concerned with the shedding away of postmodernist/poststructuralist thought. "Posthuman Bodies" embraces a constant breaking down and shifting of signs and narratives. Though Deleuzian postmodern notions of "multiplicity" inform the fragmented and faceted posthuman body presented by Halberstam and Livingston, singularity/multiplicity is not a satisfactory exclusion/inclusion of a human/posthuman body binary for these authors. Rather, H&L's posthuman body is constantly and irreducibly in a (re)circulation and (re)production of itself and its environment.

**"Identity in Oshkosh," Allucquere Rosanne Stone**

*"I am primarily concerned here with how the phenomenon of multiple personalities fits into a broader framework of cultural developments in which the abstract machine of multiplicity (in Deleuze and Guattari's words) is grinding finer and finer. Among the phenomena at the close of the mechanical age which are useful to note is the pervasive burgeoning of the ontic and epistemic qualities of multiplicity in all their forms." (p. 30)*

- Stone's provides an ethnographic account of a Wisconsin sexual assault trial where the assualt victim experiences "multiple personality disorder (MPD)," though I'll refer to the lived experience by its current medical name, dissociative identity disorder (DID). Stone uses the case as a heuristic for posing onto-epistemological questions concerning the fragmentation of posthuman identity/personality/body/virtuality. Though Stone offers some evidence which works to *depathologize* DID, for example, she includes Turkle's normalizing comparison of "MPD" to virtual systems via "multiple-user domains (MUDS)" (p. 34), I'm skeptical that Stone's use of DID as a psychoanalytic figuration of posthuman identity does not work to reinforce pathology, or at least exploit it for intellection, much in the tradition of Deleuze and Guattari's use "schizophrenia."

**"Soft Fictions and Intimate Documents," Paula Rabinowitz**

*"The last images of the film [*Soft Fiction*] return to more clichéd images from softcore porn--a woman's abandon as a shower of clear water washes over her, a woman walking barefoot along the shore, two naken women frolicking on horseback. These also are the clichés of California independent filmmaking of the 1960s--the sensuous display of the body at play in nature...they recontain the stories of female transgression and pleasure in the face of masculine power within the limits of conventionalized depictions of female desire. Yet the stories [of sexual trauma] undercut this containment, violating boundaries, just as the excesses of the extreme close-ups explide the documentary conventions of the talking head by overvaluing the partial elements of the face...These fragmented, cut-up icons of femininity that appear commodified in advertisements have been recharged by the speakers...Strand wants us to begin questioning how female pleasures are experienced and represented in patriarchal culture." (p. 108)*

*"They do have histories, and these histories will be found in what has been left of out the official accounts of the marginal. Posthumans always lie. Can posthuman women speak? Of course. Will they speak to us? Not likely." (p. 99)*

- Writing on Chick Strand's documentary, *Soft Fictions,* Rabinowitz points to the constantly constructed image of the woman on screen, simultaneously playing to and evading the cinematic male gaze through "fragmented movements" (100) and a "split gaze" that is "always calling up various performative aspects of identity which echo, refuse, confront, or merge with the sceen performances" (101). Rabinowitz feminist/posthumanist analysis of the film on the subjects' shared traits (through the currating and editing lens of Strand) which refract, deflect, and shift and (re)create narratives and identities for survival. In Rabinowitz analysis of *Soft Fictions*, the body in pain becomes an posthuman spectacle. The posthuman makes its own pain ironic in the same way patriarchal depictions of female pleasure have been made ironic in a move to resist oppression.

- Note, in Susan M. Squeir's ""Reproducing the Posthuman Body," she argues that, "Contemporary reproductive writing [and perhaps sexual writing too], can articulate not only the oppressive posthuman, but also--in its resistant discourses--the new images ans contexts that will shape the more productive and pleasurable models for reproducing the posthuman body." (p. 129)

*tags: posthuman, embodiment, queer theory, multiplicities, postmodern, sex, gender, reproduction, identity*

## *Native American DNA: Tribal Belonging and the False Promise of Genetic Science*, Kim Tallbear. 2013

*"Readers will frequently ecnounter the idiom of 'coproduction,' a key STS analytical tool that explains natural and social orders as coproduced. That is, science and technology are explained as actively entangles with social norms ans hierarchies...'science' and 'society' are mutually constitutive, meaning one loops back to in to reinforce, shape, or disrupt the actions of the other...Coproduction facilitates abd helps make sense of what could otherwise be a very confusing multidisciplinary analysis of the emergence of Native American DNA as a complex social and scientific object. In terms of Native American DNA, it problematizes a realist approach to understanding the object. Native American DNA is not simply 'naturally determined; it becomes manifest as scientists observe the movement of particular nucleotides via human bodies across time and space...The presence of such DNAs is sometimes also used by scientists and consumers to forge consequential identity connections between human bodies across time and space." (pp. 11-12)*

*"The concept of articulation is also invoked in these pages, a framework traced to two prominent cultural studies scholars, James Clifford and, before him, Stuart Hall. Like coproduction, the articulation framework complicates overly dichotomous views of phenomena as either essentially determined of overly constructed or invented, thereby implying a lack of 'realness'...[Articulation] focuses on cultural practices and knowledges as sometimes borrowed, interpreted, and reconfigured. Indeed, dynamism in cultural practice and identity formation is a sign of being alive, another key claim that indigenous peoples consistently make. They have survived. They are still here...A second key component of the articulation framework, and the reason it is helpful in relation to this subject, is its focus on power...Perhaps the genetic articulation of indigeniety will become also an *indigenous* articulation as trives increasingly move toward DNA parentage testing within a discourse of sovereignty"(p. 13)*

- Tallbear points to the importance of a particular STS technique and a framework, namely "coproduction" (as technique) and "articulation" (as framework) that challenge essentializing positivist views of "science" as uncovering natural orders. She uses these frameworks to produce a critical analysis of narrative's role in determining Native American DNA v. cultural identity, if not providing the hint of an entire "counterscience" where Native American DNA is not simply limited to the genetic testing of Indigenous bodies and tracing of deep lineage.

*"If the material properties of blood--the red fluid itself are no longer legitimate for the study of race, symbolic blood remains very much at play in twenty-first-century sociopolitical formation of the Indian. The complex semiotics of blood must be understood if we are to guage the opportunites and barriers for Native American DNA to shift the boundaries of race, trive, and indigeneity." (p. 47)*

- Native American DNA is a material-semiotic object which determines more than genetic makeup for Tallbear. Rather in a semantic shift, DNA is increasingly conflated with previous notions of lineage through "blood" and tribal uses of "blood quantum" (pp. 61-63) (and "race" is conflated with "population" in DNA research (p. 38)). These effect of these conflations complicate not only heriditary genealogies, but criteria for tribal enrollments, conceptions of ancestral memory, land soverienty and self-determinism. All of these issues complicate and confuse Indigenous identities as determined by a given tribe, band, or nation.

*"[Re: The Genographic Project] I find evolving narratives encouraging in that they demonstrate that indigene is not vanishing. [Phil] Bluehouse, as a Diné, continues to help constitute culture and knowledge. But does this particular articulation represent a coproduction of indigenous and genetic knowledge prompted too much by the stakes and goals of a corporate genetic-research project?" The Bluehouse account bolsters Genographic's claim that it works collaboratively with indigenous poeple and that its work does not contradict indigenous desires, or even traditional knowledge. But do Diné practices and knowledge shape the constitution of genetic knowledge?..A coproduction analysis is also concerned with 'how sociotechnological formations loop back and change the very terms in which we human beings think about ourselves.'" (p. 173)*

- One important element of Tallbear's critique of the Genographic Project (and other failed research efforts to produce a deep history of human migratory patterns through genetic testing and tracing) is that these initiatives fail to work with and represent the "subjects" of their research through co-production of cultural and genetic knowledges beyond extrapolating individual accounts (Bluehouse) to represent an entire people (Diné). Tallbear points to the ontoepistemological elements of coproduction through Bluehouse's melding of "sociotechnological formations" with traditional Diné knowledge represent his evolving narrative of what it means to be Diné, Indigenous, and human. 

- Note, at no point does Tallbear claim to see the evolving, co-produced, narrating and narrated subject of Native American DNA (self-determined or not) as *posthuman*. Though Tallbear's work might be related to other concepts in posthuman/biopolitical thought (e.g., Kroker's *Body Drift* via DNA codedness and identity, Haraway's "situated knowledges" and "hybridities"), *Native American DNA* does not portray its subject matter, nor its subjects/audience through posthuman critique.

*tags: indigeniety, post-colonialism, genomics, genealogy, blood, posthuman identity*

## *Animal Capital: Rendering Life in Biopolitical Times*, Nicole Shukin. 2009.

*"...animal capital resists both culturalist tendencies to reduce capitalism to an economy and fetishism of signs and materialist tendencies to reduce capitalism to an econloy and fetishism of substances." (p. 6)*

- Shukin is writing in between the traditions of biopolitical thought from Foucault, Derrida, and Agamben and Marxist thought from Delueze and Hardt and Negri. However, Shukin sees "animal capital's" rationality not in a cltural-semiotic fetishism of signs, nor in a materialist approach to to account for substance/the sum of the parts of animal capital. Instead, Shukin writes in the middle/mediating process of re-mediating/"rendering." This is a transient and transformative process at the boundries between sign and substance/language and life.

*"...animals reduced to 'mere jelly' even as they are contradictorily rendered in lively signs of technolpgical mobility." (p. 86)*

- Uses Negri's "mere jelly" (defines her use on p. 83) as theoretical groundwork for process of animal rendering, both figuratively and literally. Shukin's examples of this process include "automobility" (cars-as-animals/Fordist industrialization), "telemobility" (Telus animals/Galvani's frogs, Edison's Topsy), and "biomobility" (Animal Copyright/zoonotic diseases).

*tags*: animal studies, biopolitics, posthumanism, semiotics, laguage, capitialism

## *Body Drift: Butler, Hayles, Haraway*, Arthur Kroker. 2012.

*"There is no longer, if there ever was, a single, binding, universal history of the body, nor is it possible to speak today of the body as a cohesive singularity . . . Body drift refers to the fact that we no longer inhabit *a* body in any meaningful sense of ther term but rather occupy a multiplicity of bodies--imaginary, sexualized, disciplined, gendered, laboring, technologically augmented bodies. Moreover, the codes governing behaviour across this multiplicity of bodieshave no real stability but they themselves are in drift--random, fluctuating, changing." (p. 2)*

- Kroker has taken on the formidable task of contending with three seminal feminist thinkers in the contemporary Western tradition. Kroker traces each of Butler's, Hayles', and Haraway's novel refusals of genealogies of gender and sexuality, computational chaos and order, and the violence of capital-colonial scientific thinking (turns which push these three thinkers from the traditions of the postmodern [via groundwork in Nietzsche, Heidegger, and Marx] and toward the posthuman) in relation to their treatments of re-writing embodiment ontologies. In tracing these three thinkers' refusals of a genealogical treatment of the singular, human, material body, *Body Drift* foils its critique as it stands as its own, albeit incomplete, genealogy of posthuman embodiment.

**Contingencies (Butler)**

*"Oscillating wildly between hyperaesthetics and excremental culture, the body desperately clings to any floating signs: the signs of death, panic, fear; the signs of insecurity and instability; but perhaps also the signs of new a multiplicity that is struggling to be born, exist and thrive." (p. 38)*

*"Neither a liberal humanist committed to abstract universalism nor a poststructural deconstructionist, Butler occupies a third space in the theorization of power. Silently streaming her thought with other nomadic thinkers before her, she sets out to *undo* interpellation, to *undermine* signification, to *work through* bad conscience, and to do this in a way that is neither universal nor particular but deeply reflexive. (p. 42)*

- Butler's understanding of the body as a site of grieving and becoming: Here embodiment is operating as a function of signs, particularly transitory signs (the drift in "body drift") that do not, and cannot, commit to any singular signification. For Kroker, Butler's "posthuman" theorization of bodies and power manifests itself in her refusal to commit to the body as a singular and complete site of power. Rather, Kroker argues that Butler's evading of, and navigating counter to, reifications of power in interpellation, signification, and Nietzsche's "bad conscience" nihilism, establishes the body as a multiplicity always in a transient form.

**Complexities (Hayles)**

*"Hayles raises once again the challenge of any vision of the humanities that would be paradigmatic, namely, how to construct the creative posthuman subject out of the Charybdis of (modern) chaos and (posthuman) complexity, while avoiding the Scylla of (postmodern) catastrophe and (hypermodern) crash." (p. 67)*

*"In essence, *posthuman subjectivity is the ideological reflex of computation in the age of complexity.* Considered *ontologically,* it is as if complexity theory actually grew a body, extending itself into the human sensorium by means of a computational mind (made flesh) seeking to expand the transformative possibilities of digital culture. Understood *epistemologically,* posthuman subjectivity is a probability function, refusing determinism in favor of a form of consiousness operating by analogy. Viewed *socially* posthuman subjectivity can only fully realize itself by creative strategies of intermediation, discovering how different media can finally communicate with one another. And finally, neither a constructivist nor a realist, the posthuman subject is always in active aesthetic rebellion against the binary of logos - absence, struggling instead to surface the complex materiality that is pattern-randomness." (p. 74)*

- Kroker's Hayles has tackled the balancing act of theorizing the posthuman subject out of the chaotic pattern-randomness ubiquity of data and its complexities, while turning away from nihilistic (and literary) tendencies toward "catastrophe" and "crash" that Kroker attributes to the postmodern and hypermodern, respectively. This posthuman subject, while Kroker argues "refus[es] determinism" is also perceived as "*the* ideological reflex" (emphasis added) to an age of computational complexity. For Kroker, this reflexivity is not limited to the ontological. Rather the posthuman subject also emerges epistemologically and socially, as a slippery being engaged in endless poesis of intermediation, transformation, and rebellion of a "binary of logos-absence."

**Hybridities (Haraway)**

*"Definitely not a historian of science in the strict sense nor an aspirant to social utopia, Haraway makes of her own thought a knot of hybridities. This might explain why she can so fully, and powerfully, reveal the logic of scientific nihilism without once explicitly evoking the concept itself . . . Haraway exemplifies the double logic at the heart of nihilism can conjure up apocalyptic visions of a deracinating technological logic seeking to reduce nature and (social) natural to a passive instrumentality in the service of what Nietzsche alluded to as the 'nothingness within,' then nihilism also has an opposite, transformative dimension . This would be the singular contrubution of Heidegger's Nietzsche: that nihilism is itself the essential destiny of contemporary (Western) being because there is always, and only, a space for discovering the 'in-dwelling' of technology within the materiality of its most despotic moments." (p. 103)*

- Kroker's analysis of Haraway rounds out the final third of *Body Drift's* genealogy of feminist posthuman thought's refusal of a nihilistic determinism within an increasingly technological world-logic. Haraway's move is toward a posthuman subject of co-mingling and hybridities. Haraway's countersciences focuses on speculative fabulations/speculative feminisim (Note, my use of some of the "SFs" from *Staying with the Trouble* [2016] is achronistic to *Body Drift* [2012]). Rather than the corrosive futures of science and technology under absolute and apocolyptic power regimes, Haraway's posthuman move is to rework the very logical structure of the science-subject-power triad until it is what Kroker calls "a knot of hybridities."

*tags*: biopolitics, posthumanism, semiotics, laguage, hayles, butler, haraway, feminist theory, genealogy
