# STS Notes Log

**Last updated: August 14, 2020**

## *Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences*, Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2000.

*"[Infrastructural] inversion is a struggle against the tendency of infrastructure to disappear (except when breaking down). It means learning to look closely at technologies and arrangements that, by design and by habit, tend to fade into the woodwork (sometimes literally!). Infrastructral inversion means recognizing the depths of interdependence of technical networks and standard, on the one hand, and the real work of politics and knowledge production on the other.It foregrounds these normally invisible Lilliputian threads and furthermore gives them causal prominence in many areas usually attributed to heroic actors , social movements, or cultural mores." (p. 34)*

- Bowker and Star's "infrastructural inversion" is an STS approach to the Heideggerian problem of technology object that is present-at-hand through standardization and ubiquity (thereby, normalization). STS consistently contends with Heideggerian techno-ontology (either explicitly or implicitly) as seen already in Mol, Sismondo, etc. However, I don't believe (and it seems the scholars I've read would agree) that Heidegger's present-at-hand/ready-to-hand can fully aid STS in getting to what Bowker and Star call infrastructural inversion for critical analysis, though it is a helpful framework nonetheless. However, something that is the object of inversion for one scholar, say the production of racial bias through medical technologies, may be disinterested and invisible infrastructure for another, even though both scholars may use such technologies in their research and both scholar's research work to co-produce social realities in medicine. Haraway's "zones of implosion" helps us understand how the integrated and animated world of tools and technological use is "alive" in a way that Heideggerian ontology fails to capture.

- Infrastructural inversion helps point to the the political context of the artifacts we use and engage with. Those that shape and are shaped by us in our everyday lives, see Winner. This (Twitter post)[https://twitter.com/RedThunderAudio/status/1293236914666037250?s=20] featuring a picture of raised bridges over the Chicago river, limiting citizen access to and from the downtown core as a response to public protest, demonstrates how quickly and violently invisible infrastructures of a technologically mediated city can become overt and weaponized for political advantage.

*"The third methodological theme concerns *the past as indeterminate*. We are constantly revising our knowledge of the past in light of new developments in the present...A common example of this is a religious conversion where the past is retold as exemplifying errors, sinning, and repentance (Strauss 1959). Or when one comes out as gay or lesbian, childhood behaviours and teenage crushes become indicators of early inklingsof sexual choice (Wolfe and Stanley 1980)." (p. 40)*

- Star and Bowker point to the reversibility of contingency (one of my 3 Cs). Though the production of knowledge relies on accumulating contingent "truths," such past truths are indeterminate, revisible, and reversible in order to substantiate the present truth in question. Notably, the indeterminancy of past truths does not change their status of "truthfulness," it simply changes the ethos of their statement. In the example provided, someone coming out as gay who may have previously been assumed straight because of heternormative conventions, will likely be percieved as having *always* been gay, not having first been straight and then gay. This sort of "survivorship bias" of *truthful* information attempts to frame determinacy as it continues to adapt itself to fit a causal explanation. 

*"Garbage categories include an array of categories where things get put that you do not know what to do with--the ubiquitous "other"...These garbage or residual categories, then, tend to fix the maximum level of granularity that is possible. Their advantage is that they can signal uncertainty at the level of data collection or interpretation under conditions where forcing a more precise designation could give a false impression of positive data. The major disadvantage is that the lazy or rushed death certifier will be tempted to overuse 'other.' By their nature, forms of this kind are only manageable if there is a zone of ambiguity written into them." (p. 150)*

-

*"...if someone wanted to be classified as white, but was classifies as coloured, she or he could not got to a white scholl. If they enrolled at a coloured school this could later become legal evidence that they *were* coloured." (p. 206)*

*"The more rigid the system of racial segregation and inequity, the more important passing became to those living in the categorical borderlands." (p. 216)*

- p. 210 - cultural traits as evidence for "natural" and essentialized racial classifications

## *An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies*, Sergio Sismondo. 2010.

*"For Heidegger [in "The Question Concerning Technology"], distinctly modern technology is the application of science in the service of power; this is an objectifying pricess. In contrast to the craft tradition that produced individualized things, modern technology creates researches, objects made to be used. From the poing of view of moderen technology, the world consists of resources to be turned into new resources. A technological worldview thus produces a thorough disenchantment of the world." (p. 9)*

- See notes on Mol's *The Logic of Care* and Heideggerian approaches to logics of choice as a technology in medicine. That which is technological is made present-at-hand, the isolated and disinterested scientific/technological object. Such isolated views of science and the technoscientific object are then made into the objects of analysis for STS scholars who aim to retrace these objects' "implosions" and boundaries with the sociopolitical and various peoples' ways of being in the world, perhaps something close to the Heideggerian 'Dasein.'

*"One of the targets of [Thomas Kuhn's] *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions* is what is known (since Butterfield 1931) as "Whig history," history that attempts to construct the past as a series of steps toward (and occasionally away from) present view...According to Kuhn, *normal science* is the science done when members of a field share a recognition of key past achievements in their field, beliefs about which theories are righ, an understanding of the important problems of the field, and methods for solving those problems. In Kuhn's terminology, scientists doing normal science share a *paradigm*." (p. 12)*

- What Sismondo calls the "Kuhnian Revolution" is founded on a Benjaminian critique of historical materialism and the myth of progress through an accumulation of victory narrativess ("Theses on the Philosophy of History"). Kuhn's "normal science," and the resultant victor's history that is produced with/through it depends on what I've identified as three Cs of the social construction of science: convention, coherence, and contingency. That is, social convention as a standardization of technologies of processes, methods, and communications, a base level of coherency between groups of scientists (inter) and within each community and scientific argument (intra) in such a way that assent is recognized (assent playing a large social role in Shapin and Schaffer's *Leviathan and the Air-Pump*), and a contingency that new truths must be built upon prior accepted truths considered "scientific knowledge." If the latter cannot be achieved, convention and coherency work together to accept or dismiss new scientific knowledge as "fact" so that new productions of knowledge become contingent on the matter of fact in question. These three Cs emphasize the social construction of scientific knowledge within and between groups at every level of its production.

*"By definition, scientific and technical controversies display alternative representations, alternative attempts to construct theories and the like... a choice between Newton's and Leibniz's metaphysics may have been related to political circumstances (Shapin 1981)...Builders of technology do *heterogenous engineering* (Law 1987). They have to simultaneously build artifacts and build environments in which those artifacts can function - and, typically, neither of these activities can be done on their own. Technologists need to combine raw materials, skills, knowledge, and capital, and to do this they must enroll any number of actors, not all of whom may be immediately compatible...What we might call *heterogeneous construction* is the simultaneous shaping of the material and social world, to make them fit each other, a process of "co-construction" (Taylor 1995)." (pp. 64-65)*

- Here Sismondo emphasizes a social constructivist approach to STS where the rather than assuming the formidable and extant technoscientific "discoveries" are the result of superior skill, constructivists attempt to disentangle the surviving technology or scientific knowledge and its narrative of victor's history from the social reality that was created alongside the production of knowledge. For example, Shapin and Schaffer argue that the political turmoil of the Restoration gave Boyle leverage against Hobbes in his bid to have the experimental method of science recognized as superior to the abstractions of natural philosophy.

*"Feminist empiricism's trajectory naturally takes it toward *standpoint theory* (or standpoint epistemology), a theory of the privilege that particular perspectives can generate...The central argument is that women's experience of sexual discrimination allows them to better understand gender relations. They are able to see aspects of discrimination that cannot be seen from the male perspective...For the task of recognizing bias and discrimination, whether in scientific theories, science, or some larger society, [standpoint theory posits that] women are well positioned. More generally, people for whom social constraints are oppressive can more easily understand those constraints than can others." (p. 76)*

- Is the experience of sexual or gendered discrimination singular, universal, and monolithic? Is *Feminism* singular, universal, and monolithic? Sismondo's presentation of feminist epistemologies in STS does little to engage in intersectionality and boundary work. This lack of awareness or interest in such intersections is reflected in the structure of his book. Dedicating only one chapter exclusively to the discussion of feminist STS (none on race, notably) with little effort to weave such perspectives into and across the enirety of his reflections on STS as a field.

*"When Isaac Newton wanted to communicate his theory of light, in his "New Theory of Light and Colours" of 1672, he recast a collection of observations to form a condensed narrative of an experiment (Bazerman 1988). The single experiment was in some sense a fiction, a result of Newton's writing, bit the narrative form was compelling in a way that a collection of observations and pieces of theoretical reasoning would not be. Newton was participating in already established tropes of British science, and was refining the genreof the experimental report." (p. 149)*

- In a chapter on rhetoric and discourse, the author considers how persuasive writing (compelling narratives) have shaped and standardized the production of scientific knowledge as a genre of communication. The three Cs come into play here (as communication is a social act) where conventions of genre must be established, coherence in argumentation and with the field in which one works must present, and contingency on prior works (through citations) are expected to add ethos to one's argument. Of course, this act is also working to constructing and reproduce social realities while commiting to the logic of reality already created in the genre. How formal conventions of writing in a genre shape the information, how coherence with a particular field but not others creates boundaries around the knowledge produced, and how contingency on citing certain (big) names in a field reinforce power imbalances are all ways that science communications (re)produces realities with social, political, economic consequences.

*tags: STS, sociology, social constructivism, social reality, production of scientific knowledge.


## *Leviathan and the Air-Pump: Hobbes, Boyle, and the Experimental Life*, Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer. 1985.

*"In [the scientific member's self-evident] method [of history of science] the presuppositions of our own culture's beliefs and practices are referred to the unambiguous facts of nature or to universal and impersonal criteria of how people just do things (or do them when behaving 'rationally'). A lay member of our culture, if asked why he calls an ostrich a bird, will probably tell his inquisitor that ostriches just *are* birds..." (p. 5)*

- Shapin and Schaffer identify that in-member analysis of one's own subculture is often fraught with tautalogical thinking and erroneous irreducibility. *Things are the way they are because that's the way they are*. While the sciences have historically made (and often continue to make) claims that "authentic" scientific knowledge can be secured through rigorous, replicable, and repeatable proof (often via the experimental mode), Shapin and Schaffer recognize that one's own membership can produce near-sightedness through a sort of survivorship bias historical criticism ("the historian accomplishes this by taking the side of accepted knowledge [rather than rejected] (p.11)) of *how and why things are the way they are*. In this way Shapin and Schaffer recognize (in part) the value of what Haraway calls "situated knowledge." Though as Haraway critiques in "Modest Witness," the authors do not overcome other aspects of their situatedness, such as the experimental mode's role in the production of gendered bodies as in-group or out-group members.

*"Almost needless to say, our purpose is not evaluative: it is descriptive and explanatory. Nevertheless, questions relating to evaluation do figure centrally in this book and they do so in several ways. We have said that we shall be setting out by pretending to adopt a "stranger's perspective" with respect to the experimental programme..." (p. 12)*

*"...Boyle did not detail the steps by which he moved from matters of fact to their explanation. He did not, for example, say in what ways the air's 'elastical power' [what we now call air pressure] had been 'evinced' and established; he merely announced that this had been accomplished...Boyle was treating these explanatory items as if they were matters of fact and not hypotheses: their real existence had been *proved* by experiment and he entertained no doubt on that score." (p. 50)*

- Many of Boyle's experimental conclusions hinged on unexplained/warranted information ("matters of fact"). These findings, should they be accepted by Boyle's private community of "public experimentation" as conventions, and thereby socially necessitated, Boyle's experimental method was also, of course, a product of tautologically explained phenomena that were proven to be "matters of fact" simply by their assumed causal role in the experiment, rather than a the explanatory product or finding. 

- The authors go to great pains in the first 10 pages of their book to critique the tautological knowledge produced by in-group members of any community being investigated. However, Shapin and Schaffer do not ever examine their own situatedness and the assumptions their perspectives warrant beyond taking a "stranger's perspective," the extent to which scientific knowledge production remains "strange" to the authors is unclear.

*"How did one police the reports of witnesses so as to avoid radical individualism? Was one obliged to credit a report on the testimony of any witness whatsoever? Boyle insisted that witnessing was to be a collective act. In natural philosophy, as in criminal law, the reliability of testimony depended on its multiplicity...In experimental practice one way of securing the multiplication of witnesses was to perform experiments in social space." (pp. 56-57)

- The authors identify three "technologies"; material, literary, and social. Boyle employed mechanical tests (material technology) in front of witnesses (social technology) to have the experimental method be percieved as able to produce "matters of fact" that were necessarily unassailable after the witnesses agreed upon the explanatory conditions of the phenomenon. Boyle also meticulously detailed his notes (literary technology) in order that his experimental results may be replicated by "virtual witnesses" (with varying and limited success). The experiments themselves, and the assent gained among witnesses as community members was seen as faulty and lacking rigour by Hobbes, who criticized Boyle's "public" witnessing as being made up by a private community of aristocratic natural philosophers. However, Boyle countered Hobbes' criticism by arguing that heady natural philosophy was grounds for producing dogmatic views of possible "radical individualism." He use the political unrest of the restoration and the increasing power of the church to bolster such radical individualism in the scientific community would be akin to "*heresy*" (p. 295). See the below quote:

- *"[The Royal Society' view,] Radical individualism--the state in which each individual sets himself up as the ultimate judge of knowledge--would destroy the conventional basis of proper knowledge, while the disciplined collectiv social structure of the experimental form of life would create and sustain that factual basis. There the experimentalists were on guard against 'dogmatists' and 'tyrants' in philosophy, just as they abominated 'secretists' who produced their knowledge-claims in a private and undisciplined space." (p. 78)*

*"These exchanges [between experimentalists and the Church] gave considerable point to the proposals that Boyle and his allies produced for an establishment of a social space in which dissent would be safe and tolerable." (p. 301)*

- Ultimately, while Boyle's argument came out on top as the more historically persuasive approach to the production of scientific knowledge, the authors concede with Hobbe's moral and political rejection of Boyle's experimental method as a grounds for producing "matters of fact" that influenced by the very human actions and involvement present in conducting and interpreting the experiment.

*tags: history of science, social technologies, witnessing, restoration politics

## "Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective", Donna Haraway. 1988.

*"All these pictures of the world should not be allegories of infinite mobility and interchangeability but of elaborate specificity and difference and of the loving care people might take to learn how to see faithfully from another's point of view, even when the other is our own machine. That's not alienating distance; that's a *possible* allegory for feminist versions of objectivity. Understanding how these visual systems work, technically, socially, and psychically, out to be a way of embodying feminist objectivity." (p. 583)*

- Note, I find Haraway's later work on this topic, particularly "Modest_Witness" a much more polished presentation of the arguments in "Situated Knowledges" and would likely approach such later work before SK. I found the "we" in Haraway's "feminism"/"feminist objectivity" broad to the point of ambiguity, leaving me to question which identities/bodies/persons were not being included in the category of "feminis(t/m)s."

## *The Haraway Reader*, Donna Haraway. 2004.

**"A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s"**

*"It remains to be seen whether all 'epistemologies' as Western political people have known them fail us in the task to build effective affinities...The acid tools of post-modernist theory and the constructive tools of ontological discourse about revolutionary subjects might be seen as ironic allies in dissolving Western selves in the interests of survival. We are excrutiatingly conscious of what it means to have a historically constituted body." (p. 16)*

- Haraway critiques the broad category of epistemologies of "Western political people" in their abilitity to "build effective affinities" or rather, create hybridities that transgress Western epistemological essentialism. Though (post-modern) deconstruction and culture-construction approaches may, ironically, aid in moving away from such Western philosophical essentialism, creating effective affinities must reconcile with, but not be subsumed by, one's historically constituted self (the onto-epistemological self). 

*"[The Informatics of Domination] This list suggests several interesting things. First, the objects on the right-hand side cannot be coded as "natural," a realization that subverts naturalistic coding for the left-hand side as well. We cannot go back ideologically or materially...In relation to objects like biotic components, one must think not in terms of strategies of design, boundary constraints, rates of flow, systems logic, costs of lowering constraints. Sexual reproduction is one kind of reproductive strategy among many, with costs and benefits as a function of the system environment. Ideologies of sexual reproduction can no longer reasonably call on the notions of sex and sex role as organic aspects in natural objects like organisms and families." (pp. 20-21)*

- Haraway tells us that the cyborg does not find its origins in Eden and is not a product of sexual reproduction. Similar to its *originlessness*, the cyborg also lacks an end or *telos* unlike the humanist subject of *Western epistemologies* (p. 16), whose end, through "specific civil engineering" is to uncover natural truths as "modest witness" (p. 226) 

- Here "systems logic" is presented as being in conflict with cyborg politics in the "Informatics of Domination," that is, systems logic cannot explain away *material nature* from its presumed counterpart *ideological culture*. Cary Wolfe presents a more favourable account of systems logic and systems theories in *What Is Posthumanism?*. For Wolfe, systems theory is a tool that can (and should) be used against itself to find the discursive boundaries within any system that make said system autopoietic and thereby often reified as natural.

- Interestingly, "the informatics of domination" is the last item on *The Informatics of Domination* list, making it a reflexive system. Haraway does not fully address this.

*"Communications technologies and biotechnologies are the crucial tools to recrafting our bodies. These tools embody and enforce new socialrelations for women worldwide. Technologies and scientific discourses can be partially understood as formalizations, i.e., as frozen moments, of the fluid social interactions constituting them, but they should aslo be viewed as instruments for enforcing meanings. The boundary is permeable between tool and myth, instruments and concept, historical systems of social relations and historical anatomies of possible bodies, including objects of knowledge. Indeed, myth and tool mutually constitute each other. Furthermore, communication sciences and modern biologies are constructed by a common move--*the translation of the world into a problem of coding.*" (p. 23)*

*"The biggest threat to such power [of coding coding quantifiable elements] is interruption of communication. Any system breakdown is a function of stress." (p. 23)*

- Readers are reminded that science is always discursive and that "science" is irreducible from "science communications." The problem of coding fixes objects of knowledge as contained and quantifiable within the communications systems. This is, of course, is a myth long proferred by science communications and dominant forms of science discourse.

- The interruption of such communications, or the introduction of new methods of communicating objects of knowledge, works to queer those objects from the dominant discourse, and thereby point to how a *queerness* of scientific knowledge prefigures the dominant communication of scientific knowledge. This is how cyborg politics works.

**"Morphing in The Order: Flexible Strategies, Feminist Science Studies, and Primate Revisions"**

*"The major epistemological issue for me...is that knowledge is *always* an engaged material practice and *never* a disembodied set of ideas." (p. 200)*

*"Science and science studies depend constitutively upon troping. Unless we swerve, we cannot communicate; there is no direct route to the relationship we call knowledge, scientific or otherwise." (p. 201)*

*"*First*, I am physically hypersensitive to the historically specific, materially-semiotically dense practices that constitute science made, as well as science in the making (Latour 1987). Science is practice and culture (Pickering 1992) at every level of the onion. There is no core, only layers...Everything is supporters, but there is no final foundation, only the infinite series of carrying all there is...[N]othing insoluble precipitates out of the solution of science as cultural practice." (pp. 201-202)*

- In these pages, Haraway argues that science communication is embedded in circumstance or situatedness. There is no role in science that allows a transcendent, objective knowledge to emerge in front of the witness. Rather, science is constituted on troping through what means of communication and available language we have. Thus, the material practices of science and science studies are always engaged in their semiotic structuring.

- Instead, she suggests that "zones of implosion" (similar to naturecultures) are more useful areas for knowledge-making-projects because the knowledge here emerges "at stake, and alive," self-aware of its "technical, mythic, organic, cultural, textual, oneiric (dream-like), political, economic, and formal lines of force" (p. 207).

**"Modest_Witness@Second_Millenium"**

*"It was the general absence, not the occaisonal presence, of women of whatever class or lineage/color--and sexual difference worked--that gendered the experimental way of life in a particular way...Gender is the relation between variously constituted categories of of men and women (and variously arrayed tropes), differentiated by nation, generation, class, lineage, color, and much else. Shapin and Schaffer assembled all the elements to say something about how gender was one of the products of the air-pump; but the blind spot of seeing gender as women instead of as a relationship got in the way of the analysis...all the entities in technoscience are constituted *in* the action of knowledge production, not *before* the action starts." (pp. 228-229)*

- For Shapin and Schaffer (*Leviathan and the Air-Pump), a critique of gendered involvement in science action prefigures gender to scientific knowledge-production. That is, the authors treated gender as an isolated variable outside of and independent to the experiments taking place in seventeenth-century scientific culture. Haraway sees this posturing of gender as an insufficient critique of "the action of knowledge production." For Haraway, the very lack of and erasure of participation in science by "marked" bodies (non-male, non-white, non-members of the scientific community) is an act in which gender is constituted as a "product" of science and hegemonic participation in science by "unmarked" bodies is reproduced in science discourse.

- In this way, the unmarked body is assumed to be a sort of *control group* of the experiment. Shapin and Schaffer, Haraway argues, fall victim to the err of "seeing gender as women" but she reminds us that no body is innocent or a neutral, controllable group. 

*"Like Latour, Harding is committed to science-in-the-making. Unlike the Latour of *Science in Action*, she does not mistake the constituted and constitutive practices that generate and reproduce systems of stratified inequality--and that issue in the protean, historically specific, marked bodies of race, sex, and class--for preformed, functionalist categories...Critical reflexivity, or strong objectivity, does not dodge the world-making practices of forging knowledges with different chances of life and death built into them. All that critical reflexivity, diffraction, situated knowledges, modest interventions, or strong objectivity "dodge" is the double-faced, self-identical god of transcendent cultures of no culture, on the one hand, and of subjects and objects exempt from the permanent finitude of engaged interpretation on the other." (pp. 236-237)*

- Haraway critiques Latour's dialetic of power theory in *Science in Action* for the same prefiguring of constituted being that is present in Shapin and Schaffer's work. Instead, Haraway prefers Sandra Harding's "strong objectivity," a resistance to accept that the stronger science will present a unified truth of the object of knowledge in question. Strong objectivity and situated knowledge do not stand in for arguments of unified or whole truths, however. They simply point to a "zone of implosion" between the innocent "culture of no culture" assumed by the "modest witness" and the finitude of absolute relativism. Situated knowledges are self-critical, self-aware, partial, and always in conversation.

*tags: science studies, feminist sts, objectivity, partialiality, hybridity, cyborg theory, discourse, science and technology communications

## *The Logic of Care*, Annemarie Mol. 2008.

*"Are 'we', in the 'West', indeed autonomous individuals? The answer is: no, 'we' are not...Some sociologists have studied how in actual practice people in 'free societies' make their choices. They have found that making choices takes a lot of energy, energy that not everybody has to spare or likes to spend on it. They have also found that 'we' end up choosing remarkably similar things. Indeed some scholars have argued that autonomy is not the opposite of heteronomy at all. Instead, they say, making people long for choices and investing in them is a disciplining technique." (p. 4)*

*"The West is not simply Enlightened. It does not just celebrate rationality, autonomy and choice, but has a rich and multi-layered care tradition as well." (p. 5)

*"The scientific tradition that is currently most prominent in health care--that of clinical epidemiology--has not been designed to deal with the unexpected effects of interventions." (p. 99)*

- Mol starts her critique by pressuring the 'Western' tradition of certain Enlightenment ideals which favour traits like rationality, autonomy of the person, and choice. However, these values, as Mol argues, are not the sole ideals espoused in Enlightenment philosophy and there has been an erasure of traditions of care in classical liberalism. Not only does the fixing of certain ideals in time and politic make for ideaological thinking, this also becomes problematic for Mol as the medical sciences have based their practices on many of these fixed Enlightenment ideals in their methodolofy which makes medical philosophy ill-suited to face the unexpected and turbulant nature of patient life that comes into play in clinical practice. This is why Mol suggests a 'logic of care' is necessary in (specifically diabetes) clinical treatment.

- Mol looks presents two competing logics, the 'logic of care' and the 'logic of choice' present in her ethnographic accounts of diabetes treatment and management in on hospital's outpatient clinic in the Netherlands. For Mol, the logic of choice, while an ethical step of from medical paternalism (often seen as forced treatment plans/no options), often ends up rejecting patients lived experiences in its two manifestations: a consumerist logic of choice which centres patient-as-customer, and thereby sells treatment as products without the dialogic process of care, and a civic logic of choice that centres patient-as-citizen which figures the patients' rational accounts of their experiences as removed from the body which can prove counterproductive to treating diseases of the body ("...citizens have to control, tame or transcend their bodies so as to be able to choose" (p. 47))

- Instead, the logic of care is a process (p. 20) which requires open and active dialogue from both doctor and patient, as well as mutual responsibility and expertise (the patient is the expert of their own lives/experiences). The care process is unstable, complex and sometimes unweildy, it "involves a team (of professionals, machines, medication, **bodies**, patients, and relevant others) and tasks are divided between members of that team in ever-changing ways" (p. 21, emphasis my own). While Mol's 'logic of care' often privileges the discourse of *embodiment* and *lived experience*, it is interesting that she often highlights the "body" as something seperate from disease or the patient themselves. In this way, Mol subscribes to the Cartesian language of mind/body split which undermines the logic of care's networked approach to living with chronic illness. 

- Further, Mol claims her work is in "unravelling" of languages, styles and genres (p. 91). However, as a critical discourse analysis Mol in fact does not deeply interrogate language in the cultural world of clinical diabetes treatment. Rather, she employs loose and floating terminology such as "health" and "healthy" to signify good care without critically addressing the vacuous social baggage behind what it means to be "healthy."

*"Yes, this is exactly what the logic of care wants you to do. In order to take care of yourself, you may need to deviate."

- The logic of care embraces compassionate deviancy over rigid 'normalcy.'

*"[The patient's] diabetes nurse explained how to use a monitor a long time ago. But even so, there is something more troubling about presenting a blood sugar monitor as a separate sellable product, disentangled from the care process in which it is embedded...The market requires that some product (device, plus skills training, plus kindness and attention) is delineated as the product on offer. A lot may be included in this product, but what is on offer and what is not has to be specified." (p. 20)

*"Whichever the form of diabetes, the care process supplements the failing internal feedback system with one which is partially external." (p. 21)

*"When you have injected insulin, blood sugar levels decrease as the cells burn up or stock the sugar they can now absorb. As blood sugar levels get lower, **bodies** without diabetes start to produce glucagon which releases the body's sugar supplies. In **people** with diabetes, this counter-regulation does not work properly." (p. 50)*

- In the logic of care, learning how to *care for a product* (i.e., proper usage of technology) is part of learning how to *care for a patient*. The product offered must include support to care for the material/commercial elements of the treatment. The patient and the technology are collectively networked in this way. Per Mol's description, the condition of diabetes requires *conscious externalization* of endocrinological feedback system - making it almost exocrine.

*"Technologies in treatments are taken to be 'means'. They serve an end...Countering a simplified belief in 'science' as the answer to all questions, the logic of choice stresses the multiplicity of medical possiblities. This makes good sense. In its turn, however, the logic of choice simplifies the relation between means and end. It suggests that, if you choose where you want to go, your technologies will get you there, However, in the consulting room, it quickly becomes clear that technologies are not obedient means: they rarely subordinate themselves to their official ends." (pp. 54-55)*

- In her critique of oversimplifying science and technology as a 'means to end' in the logic of choice, Mol perhaps adopts a Heideggerian view of medical ontology. Here, the logic of choice sees patient and their tools not as integrated prosthetics in a network of activity, but as isolated objects that are 'present-at-hand.' In the logic of care, the technologies are integrated into all aspects of the life, sociality, history, etc., of the patient and fit into a ready-to-hand ontology of diabetes treatment. In fact, it may be that it is not until the logic-of-choice's 'present-at-hand' ontology fails (eg., blood glucose monitors are too bulky, the buttons are too small, test strips for that brand are too expensive/not covered by a patient's insurance), that the technology is then characterized by its 'unreadiness-to-hand.'

*tags: science studies, technology studies, medicine, feedback systems, care, therapeutics 
