**Last updated: July 24, 2020**

## Prompt: Identify three distinct articulations of posthumanism ##

   In her 1999 work, How we Became Posthuman, N. Katherine Hayles presents a genealogy of the influences mid-century cybernetic thinking has had on both the way technologies of information and “the biological, social, linguistic, and cultural changes that initiate, accompany, and complicate their development” (p. 29) is articulated as “informatics” (Hayles borrows this context of the term from Donna Haraway) and the simultaneous cultural reproduction of an informatics ontology in science fiction literature. For Hayles, the arrival of the “posthuman” through cybernetic discourse marks the loss of embodiment which she argues “has been systematically downplayed or erased in the cybernetic construction of the posthuman”  (4). Arthur Kroker frames Hayles’ posthuman subject(ivity) as the almost deterministic, “ideological reflex of computation in the age of complexity” (Body Drift 74). This ideological reflex, according to Hayles, is the result of the production of “flickering signifiers” in complexity theory and computational sciences which ultimately allow discursive products such as language, thought, and consciousness to be reduced to an issue of code, and to be presumed immaterial. Such dematerialization, she argues, marks an “epistemic shift toward complexity theory’s pattern/randomness dichotomy and away from presence/absence” (29), where pattern/randomness shows its roots clearly in the tradition of informatics and seems to dominate the vestiges of modern, post-Enlightenment, post-Cartesian presence/absence epistemic views. 

   It is these competing dualisms that define Hayles’ ultimate articulation of the progeny of cybernetic theory and the predominantly literary posthuman subject as able to achieve distributed consciousness “through recursive feedback loops cycling between different [and multiple] levels of coding” (279) that is, a subject of multiplicity which finds subjectivity mediated across numerous virtual systems of informatics (technological, biological, social). As Hayles is critical of literary figuring of this posthuman subject that fails to return to a material/embodied grounding of the conscious subject, this mediation across informatics is necessary for Hayles’ articulation of the posthuman subject to refigure itself into a discourse between both the dominant pattern/randomness dialectic that imploded virtuality with immateriality and the presence/absence dialectic which “connects materiality and signification in ways not possible within the pattern/randomness dialectic. To be useful,” Hayles argues, “the map of the posthuman needs to contain both dialectics” (pp. 247-248).
A second articulation of the posthuman subject, which appears in a number notable works predating Hayles’ How We Became Posthuman is the subject of “floating identities” (Stone 3). Though distributed consciousness and floating identities share their genealogical roots in the poststructuralist “multiplicities” from Deleuze’s and Guattari’s Capitalism and Schizophrenia, the articulation of the posthuman subject as floating identities has figured itself, I would argue, resolutely in practice, performance, and pleasure with the works of thinkers like Halberstam and Livingston, Stone, and Foster. Where Hayles’ argues that the distributed consciousness of the posthuman subject needs to contend with its own erasure of materiality, Judith “Jack” Halberstam and Ira Livingston remind us in Posthuman Bodies that the posthuman subject, virtual as it may be, are still embodied, and that “Posthuman bodies are the causes and effects of postmodern relations of power and pleasure, virtuality and reality, sex and its consequences…it is, as we shall see, a queer body” (“Introduction” 3). This articulation of the posthuman body assumes from the beginning an irreducible relationship between the signified, discursive subject and its embodied experience. However, this does not preclude the posthuman subject of floating identities from participation in cybernetic/computing systems. In The War of Desire and Technology, Allucquère Rosanne “Sandy” Stone, frames computing systems and their virtual environments as “arenas  for social experience and dramatic interaction, a type of media more like public theater, and their output is used for qualitative interaction, dialogue, and conversation. Inside the little [computer] box are other people” (16). Here, the complexity of virtual systems/information-reduced-to-code from the cybernetic posthuman Hayles’ contends with and the performative nature of interaction, dialogue, and all other embodied, lived, artifacts of sociality implode into a posthuman subject whose identity is fragmented and floating across mediated systems, but whose gestures of performance and pleasure are always material and embodied.

   In The Souls of Cyberfolk, Thomas Foster engages with the posthuman, cyborg figure as a subject of floating identities Stone’s use of “warranting” as “the production and maintenance of [a] link between a discursive space and a physical space” (Stone qtd in Foster 138). The necessity for this link is made more obvious by virtual reality computer interfaces precisely to the extent that they exaggerate the separation between these two spaces to previously unheard-of lengths.” (138). Guided by warranting, as production and maintained between the dichotomous physical/virtual of floating identity, Foster analyses the graphic novel series, Deathlok which traces the cyb(er)/(org) diaspora of  the Michael Collins/Deathlok character. Through a post-colonial/critical race lens, Foster is able complicate the articulation of the posthuman subject as “floating identities” by reminding us that virtuality and fragmented movements through subjectivity can be experienced as racial violence as floating identity can read as diaspora and that “racial performances in cyberspace seem to blur the distinction between passing and blackface …to the extent that white people as well as blacks must pass as white to be recognized as such in the absence of their bodies, and black people as well as whites must put on a kind of blackface to be recognized as black (167). Though embodied production and performativity is a necessary component of the “floating identities” articulation of the posthuman, and a component starkly missing from Hayles’ “distributed consciousness” articulation, Foster’s work, in the tradition of Fanon, does not mistake posthuman embodied performance, as ironic as it may be, for a pleasurable or even innocent dialectic between the discursive and material production of identity.
	
   A third, though not final articulation is not one of the “posthuman subject,” but rather one of “posthumanism” as the onto-epistemological successor to post-Enlightenment humanist rationality. Cary Wolfe’s What is Posthumanism? provides a genealogy of “posthumanist” thought and its various recursions of and divergences from humanist tendencies. Citing Bromstrom, Wolfe traces contemporary instantiations of transhumanism as a direct descendant of “Renaissance humanism and the Enlightenment” with its emphasis on “human perfectability and rationality” (xiii) as achieved through practices of “empirical science and critical reason” (p. xiv).  In this way, the genealogical history to transhumanist posthumanism is presented as the logical precursor to Hayles’ posthuman subject born from the cybernetic age. However, Wolfe is quick to dismiss transhumanist ideals as the "posthumanism" of his concern because of transhumanist tendencies to reproduce Enlightenment rationality, combined with futurists' dreams of extropian technologies without exercising its own protocols of "critical reason" against its own system of philisophical production.
	
   Instead, Wolfe's work pushes the boundaries of posthumanist thought past the physical/virtual boundary work of Stone and Foster, and past the pattern/randomness dialectic that Hayles’ argues has caught the cybernetically-born posthuman. Rather, Wolfe tends to dismiss the question of the “posthuman subject” altogether in favour of presenting the onto-epistemological characteristics of “posthumanism” which is inspired by an almost Derridean deconstruction through the critical reflexivity of systems theory. A critically reflexive posthumanism becomes a necessarily ethical argument. For Wolfe, “...posthumanism means not the triumphal surpassing of or unmasking of something, but an increase in the vigilance, responsibility, and humility that accompany living in a world so newly, and differently, inhabited” (47). This response-ability (in the Harawayan sense) to the system/environment relation rings similar to Stone's warranting as “a different way of conceptualizing the relationship to the human body” (Stone, 40). However, Wofe pushes the boundaries of relation further than Stone's physical/virtual duality and opens the terrain of posthumanist critique to include all cultural, social, and psychic production within explicitly non-humanist (post-humanist) ontological positionings across environments.

---

## Prompt: Under what assumptions, and according to which traditions / histories do various articulation of posthumanism define ‘human.’ ##

**Distributed Consciousness:** 
   
   For Hayles’, the posthuman subject of distributed consciousness, predominately produced from the zeitgeist of the cybernetic age and its aftershocks, is a human whose locus of subjectivity, the very being of ‘being human’ lies in consciousness rather than the physical body (How We Became Posthuman 5). This articulation, according to Hayles, is similar to  the liberal humanist subject’s emphasis on mind over body. However, the metaphysics of the posthuman ‘human’ as presented in How We Became Posthuman is less dependent on a transcendency of the mind out of the body as pure subjectivity but is instead preoccupied with a transcendent  imaginary of virtuality and informatics where popular science fiction of the latter half of the twentieth century flirted with transcendency through uploading and downloading consciousness into new material containers. In this way, the posthuman ‘human’ subject “envisions the conscious mind as a small subsystem running its program of self-construction and self-assurance while remaining ignorant of the actual dynamics of complex systems (286). Here, the ego of the posthuman is simultaneously and perhaps contradictorily bigger than and outside of its own humanity while still focused locally on self-construction. Hayles is adamant that this posthuman is not antihuman, though she rejects futurist Hans Moravec’s view of the posthuman as the hyper-liberal-humanist self-subject. Instead, Hayles is optimistic that her final articulation, one “grounded in embodied actuality rather than disembodied information…offers resources for rethinking the articulation of humans with intelligent machines” (287).

**Fragmented Identities:** 

   The “floating identities” articulation of the posthuman subject might best be thought of as being infinitely caught up in dialectical negotiations of identity within networks both social and virtual (i.e., discursive). Of course, like Hayles’ rejection of the dematerialized, disembodied posthuman consciousness, the posthuman ‘human’ of fragmented identities is not disembodied through virtuality. Rather, this articulation of the posthuman emphasizes a constant negotiation between embodied physicality and the promises of virtuality in the construction of identity. For Stone and later Foster, this negotiation is best described through the process of “warranting,” which produces and maintains the dialectic link between the physical reality which constitutes embodied identity and the virtual reality which constitutes social/discursive identity (Stone 40). In this articulation, posthuman subjects are co-constructed through and by their participation across various environments, but such constructions are multiplicitous and partial, hence fragmented. For example, Foster explores in Deathlok how the character Michael Collins must negotiate varied and partial identities both physically embodied and virtually as he is co-constructed through environments. Collins’/Deathlok’s warranting of self produces numorous identities and roles that the character must contend with; human, cyborg, black, captive, male, father, pacifist, weapon, scientist, technology. The posthuman of fragmented identities does not settle on a single ‘human’ identity as imagined by liberal humanism, it is “no longer part of ‘the family of man’” Halberstam and Livingston tell us (Posthuman Bodies 3). Rather, the posthuman body of fragmented identities is a “zoo” of relations, production, and maintenance of its own ontology.

**Humans in Posthumanism:**

   Finally (for the purpose and scope of this response), Wolfe’s articulation of “posthumanism” finds itself tackling the question of the ‘human’ from within a new paradigm of onto-epistemology that decided has not produced a ‘posthuman’ from its ‘human’ predecessor (as his distinction between transhumanism and posthumanism detail in the introduction). Wolfe’s account of the ‘human’ is concerned with rethinking the human out of humanist cultural practices and explanations that are no longer befitting to our species’ relationship with self, world, and ‘other’ and towards posthumanist cultural practices and explanations that revise the human position away from the centre of the system of relations. Wolfe employs the still-sharp tools of the humanities (critical and literary analyses, theoretical framing–-though predominately that of postmodernists/poststructuralists) but through a lens fit for the posthumanities. In his analysis of the film Dancer in the Dark, Wolfe explores how posthumanist art and artifacts decenter the human experience by evading cultural generic expectations—in this case, absurdity and a denial of anticipated experience to the point of frustration and vitriol from audiences (What Is Posthumanism? 170). The project of posthumanism, according to Wolfe, is not to reimagine the human itself (and thereby still centre the human in practice), but to remain human, albeit more critically attuned to the practices we partake in and the systems we reflexively construct and inhabit. Thus, the human of Wolfe’s posthumanism demands “an increase in the vigilance, responsibility, and humility that accompany living in a world so newly, and differently, inhabited." (47).

